---
layout: post
title: An intro to uv
date: 2025-03-15 11:59:00-0000
description: A Swiss‐Army knife for Python data science
tags: python coding
giscus_comments: true
related_posts: false
toc:
  sidebar: left
---

Python veterans will be familiar with `pip`, `poetry`, `pyenv`, `conda` and a few other tools for managing projects, packages and environments. [`uv`](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv)'s goal is to replace them all while being blazingly fast.

We will use `uv` for a prototypical machine learning project: train a neural network to classify images of handwritten digits from the [MNIST dataset](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MNIST_database) using a [convolutional neural network](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolutional_neural_network). The input of the model will be a 28x28 pixel image, and the output will be a vector of 10 probabilities, one for each digit. If you are interested in the details of the model, you can check out the [code](https://github.com/hclimente/hclimente.github.io/tree/main/assets/python/2025-03-15-python-uv/mnist-classifier).

<div style="width:50%; margin:0 auto;">
    {% include figure.liquid
        loading="eager"
        path="assets/python/2025-03-15-python-uv/mnist-classifier/img/mnist_examples.webp"
        class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1"
        alt="Sample MNIST digits"
        style="max-width:50%;"
    %}
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A few examples from MNIST
</div>

Previously I would have used `conda` to create an environment. I would install all the packages I need via a few, slow `conda install`s. Eventually I will start my work. If, during my model development I need to install additional packages, I will cross my fingers not to confront the dreaded `Solving environment: failed with initial frozen solve. Retrying with flexible solve.` error. Once I am done, I will dump my environment into an `environment.yaml` file, remove the dependencies that are only used in development, and hope that the final environment resembles enough the one I worked on. Then, I will build a Docker image based off this environment file to deploy the model.

I am not sure if it came across, but I was not 100% happy about my previous workflow. Let's see how `uv` made it a more pleasant experience.

# Why `uv`?

Before diving into the details, it's worth justifying why we need _yet another tool_ for managing Python-centric data science projects.

First, `uv` is **fast**. Stereotypically, it's written in Rust, a compiled language known for its performance. Besides, it uses different strategies to speed up package installation, like caching and parallelization. Anyone that has installed a package with `conda` knows that package resolution can be a pretty painful experience.

Second, `uv` boosts **reproducibility**. As we will see below, it makes it easy to create and share virtual environments. This is key to ensure that multiple developers can work on a consistent environment. Furthermore, it facilitates moving projects from development to production.

Third, `uv` leverages **common standards** within the Python ecosystem. This reduces the probability of being locked-in in its ecosystem, and makes it easy to collaborate with other developers that use different tools.

Last, `uv` is **one** tool, which means that I don't need to remember the syntax of multiple tools, or how to use them together.

{% details Why _not_ `uv`? %}

I am always quite enthusiastic about the new, shinier tool. But before jumping straight into `uv`, it's worth considering the downsides of adopting it.

First, `uv` is **young**. In contrast, tools like `pip`, `conda` or `venv` have been around for more than a decade. I have no doubt they will be around for at least another decade and are unlikely to pull the rug from under me with breaking changes. Furthermore, they have a broad community, which makes it easy to find support.

Second, `uv` is mainly developed by [Astral](https://astral.sh), a VC-backed startup that hasn't started monetizing their products. It remains to be seen how their future business model will impact their tools. I should highlight that `uv` is open-source and licensed under MIT, which is a relief.

I believe that it's a worth trade-off. But, you know, caveat emptor.

{% enddetails %}

# Starting a new project

After [installing `uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/) we simply need to run `uv init` to start a new project:

```bash
uv init mnist-classifier
```

This creates a directory `mnist-classifier` in the current directory containing a few files we'll soon dig into. One of them is a [`pyproject.toml`](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/writing-pyproject-toml/) file to store the project's metadata. This is a standard file used by [many](https://python-poetry.org/docs/pyproject/) [tools](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/build-system/pyproject-toml/) [in](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/configuration/) [the](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/usage_and_configuration/the_basics.html#command-line-options) [Python](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/reference/customize.html#pyproject-toml) [ecosystem](https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/pyproject_config.html). For instance, `pip install .` would install all the packages listed under the `dependencies` field. The `pyproject.toml` file created by `uv` looks like this:

```toml
[project]
name = "mnist-classifier"
version = "0.1.0"
description = "Add your description here"
readme = "README.md"
requires-python = ">=3.10"
dependencies = []
```

Furthermore, it will start a git repository, with a sensible `.gitignore`.

{% details What about _package_ projects? %}

By default, `uv init` creates an _application_ project. This is appropriate for scripts, like simple tools. This is why the command above created a `main.py` file, meant to be the entry point of our application. Alternatively, we could create a _library_ project with `uv init --package mnist-classifier-pkg`. This would create a new directory `mnist-classifier-pkg` and populate it with a standard structure and configuration suitable for a Python library.

{% enddetails %}

# Creating our working environment

Multiple Python projects can be run on the same machine, and they can depend on different versions of the same package. This is solved by creating _virtual environments_. These are self-contained directories containing a Python interpreter and an independent set of Python packages. There are multiple solutions to create and manage virtual environments, like [`venv`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html), [`conda`](https://anaconda.org/anaconda/conda) or [`poetry`](https://python-poetry.org/).

`uv` leverages Python's native support for different virtual environments: `venv`. The virtual environment contains its own installation of Python, whose version is specified in `.python-version`. `uv init` created this file:

```
3.10
```

The virtual environment packages live in the `.venv` directory. When Python runs from within an environment, it uses the packages installed in that environment, and only those packages. Typically we would activate this virtual environment from the terminal with `source .venv/bin/activate`. This will append `.venv/bin/` to our `PATH`, loading the `python` located there into our environment. However, this comes with an overhead: we need to remember to activate the environment before running any Python script, and we need to deactivate (`deactivate`) it when we are done. This is a source of errors, as we may forget to activate the environment or, worse, forget to deactivate it.

That's why `uv` does not require explicitly activating the environment. Instead, we can use `uv run <script>.py` to run any Python script or command using the environment's Python. For instance, `uv init` created a short, example script `main.py`:

```python
def main():
    print("Hello from mnist-classifier!")


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

As stated, we can run it using our default Python, as we are used to (`python main.py`), maybe after loading the relevant environment. But we can also run it using `uv run main.py`, which will run the script using the environment's Python interpreter. Besides avoiding loading/unloading virtual environments, `uv run` will automatically create the project environment if it does not exist. Similarly, we can run an interactive Python session via `uv run python`.

## Installing the required packages

Upon its first run, `uv run main.py` created a virtual environment. To do this, it examined the (empty) `dependencies` list in `pyproject.toml` and resolved an (empty) set of packages.

To start our little data science project, we'll need to install the [`PyTorch`](https://pytorch.org/) library. Typically we would run `pip install torch`; but in `uv` we use `uv add torch` instead. This installs the most recent version of the package that is compatible with our environment (2.7.0). The whole thing took 9 seconds. For comparison, installing `torch` with `conda` took 48 seconds. Upon installation, `pyproject.toml` gets updated to:

```toml
dependencies = [
    "torch>=2.7.0",
]
```

While we did indeed request `torch`, `torch` depends, in turn, on other packages, like `numpy`. This is not reflected in `pyproject.toml`, which contains only a loose specification the packages our project depends on. Furthermore, as we install additional packages like `torchvision` or `matplotlib`, the `uv` will need to resolve all the dependencies between the packages. `uv` keeps an additional file, the lockfile (`uv.lock`) that records the exact state of the environment with all the specific package resolutions. The lockfile is thus considerably more thorough than `pyproject.toml`. For instance, after `uv add torch` it expanded to 353 lines describing all the specific packages, their versions and the metadata that were installed in the environment. This is a small excerpt of the lockfile:

```toml
[[package]]
name = "filelock"
version = "3.18.0"
source = { registry = "https://pypi.org/simple" }
sdist = { url = "https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/0a/10/c23352565a6544bdc5353e0b15fc1c563352101f30e24bf500207a54df9a/filelock-3.18.0.tar.gz", hash = "sha256:adbc88eabb99d2fec8c9c1b229b171f18afa655400173ddc653d5d01501fb9f2", size = 18075 }
wheels = [
    { url = "https://files.pythonhosted.org/packages/4d/36/2a115987e2d8c300a974597416d9de88f2444426de9571f4b59b2cca3acc/filelock-3.18.0-py3-none-any.whl", hash = "sha256:c401f4f8377c4464e6db25fff06205fd89bdd83b65eb0488ed1b160f780e21de", size = 16215 },
]
```

`uv.lock` should be under git control, providing the exact recipe to replicate an environment. This is key, for instance, to ensure that all developers are working on a consistent environment. It can also be used to ensure that production code runs in the same environment in which development happen, as we'll see [below](#deploying-the-model).

> If needed, `uv.lock` can be exported into a [`requirements.txt`](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/reference/requirements-file-format/) file for legacy tools, via `uv export --format=requirements-txt >requirements.txt`.

{% details Other package management commands %}

Besides `uv add`, there are other commands that can be used to manage packages. For starters, its counterpart `uv remove <package_name>` will uninstall `<package_name>`. Another command that can trigger package management is `uv run <script>.py`. Before running the script, it will ensure that the lockfile is in sync with `pyproject.toml` and then ensure that the project environment is in sync with the lockfile.

Syncing refers to (un)installing packages in the project environment to match the lockfile. `uv run` will do this automatically, as we just saw. But it can also be forced manually with `uv sync`.

Last, when adding new packages, `uv` will tend to be conservative. It will install the most recent version of the package that is compatible with the current environment. To force a specific version, we can use `uv add <package_name>==<version>`. For instance, `uv add torch==2.0.1` will install version 2.0.1 of `torch`, even if a newer version is available. We can request `uv` to upgrade all packages if possible with `uv lock --upgrade`; or a specific package with `uv lock --upgrade-package <package_name>`.

> To keep compatibility with `pip` workflows, `uv` also supports `uv pip install <package_name>` and `uv pip uninstall <package_name>`. These will (un)install the package in the current environment, but it will not update `pyproject.toml` or `uv.lock`. For this reason, they should be avoided in favor of `uv add` and `uv remove`.

{% enddetails %}

## Installing development-only dependencies

As a data scientist, Jupyter notebooks are my bread and butter. In order to run Jupyter notebooks on our `uv` environment, we need to install the [IPython kernel `ipykernel`](https://pypi.org/project/ipykernel/). However, `ipykernel` is qualitatively different from other packages: it is not a dependency of our code, but a tool needed for development. Once my code is ready, I will distribute it as a standalone Python script that has no dependencies on `ipykernel`. The same principle applies to tools like `pytest`, used to test your code, but which the end-user shouldn't require unless they intend to contribute to the project.

`uv` allows you to add development dependencies with `uv add --dev ipykernel`, which will add the following to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[dependency-groups]
dev = [
    "ipykernel>=6.29.5",
]
```

This allows Visual Studio Code to find this virtual environment and run Jupyter notebooks on it. Alternatively you can launch a Jupyter lab with `uv run --with jupyter jupyter lab`.

# (Training &) Deploying the model

Now comes the hard part. I wrote a simple script to train a convolutional neural network on the MNIST dataset. The script is located in [`train.py`](https://github.com/hclimente/hclimente.github.io/tree/main/assets/python/2025-03-15-python-uv/mnist-classifier/train.py), and can be run with `uv run train.py`. It gets 98% classification accuracy on the held-out samples. Neat!

To conclude, let's exemplify how `uv` boosts reproducibility, helping us deploy the model as a Docker image. There are [multiple pre-built images](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/docker/#available-images) that include `uv` and different versions of Python.

Deploying the model is as easy as copying the model weights and the prediction script [`predict.py`](https://github.com/hclimente/hclimente.github.io/tree/main/assets/python/2025-03-15-python-uv/mnist-classifier/predict.py) into the Dockerfile, copying some `uv` files, and building the environment:

```Dockerfile
FROM ghcr.io/astral-sh/uv:python3.10-bookworm-slim

RUN mkdir -p /mnist_classifier/data
WORKDIR /mnist_classifier

# ensure that uv.lock is not modified
ENV UV_LOCKED=1

# copy the minimum required files:
## the uv files needed to recreate the environment
COPY pyproject.toml uv.lock ./
## the prediction script
COPY predict.py .
## the model weights
COPY data/mnist_cnn.pt data/

# recreate the environment
RUN uv sync

CMD ["uv", "run", "predict.py"]
```

```bash
docker build -t hclimente/mnist_classifier .
docker run hclimente/mnist_classifier
```

```
SimpleCNN(
  (conv1): Conv2d(1, 32, kernel_size=(3, 3), stride=(1, 1))
  (conv2): Conv2d(32, 64, kernel_size=(3, 3), stride=(1, 1))
  (fc1): Linear(in_features=1600, out_features=128, bias=True)
  (fc2): Linear(in_features=128, out_features=10, bias=True)
)
Downloading MNIST test set...
Accuracy of SimpleCNN on the 10,000 test images: 98 %
```

The key command here is `uv sync --locked`, which will recreate the environment using the exact versions of the packages specified in `uv.lock`. This ensures that the environment used to train the model is identical to the one used to deploy it. It's worth highlighting that the lockfile is cross-platform: I generated it on macOS, but the Docker image is based on Debian.

> Note: If you use GPU-specific packages, wheels may differ. See [Astral’s docs](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/guides/integration/pytorch/#installing-pytorch).

# Conclusions

We have seen how `uv` can be used to manage Python projects, packages and environments. It tickles my craving for reproducibility, is pleasingly snappy and has simplified repetitive workflows. I look forward to seeing how it keeps evolving.

# Further reading

- [A year of uv: pros, cons, and should you migrate](https://www.bitecode.dev/p/a-year-of-uv-pros-cons-and-should)
